# About the Project

This semester I became familiar with the New York City 311 dataset. 311 is a hotline that handles all non-emergency calls and complaints made. In exploring the dataset, I made an initial project in another class that focused on just the number of illegal fireworks that happened across all five of the boroughs during the pandemic. I had picked that project because I personally have experienced it living in Brooklyn. Then I began to wonder how many other complaints have been made and how it has increased or decreased from the previous year. When I looked up articles about 311, they had observed a huge surge in complaints aside from just illegal fireworks. This is what then inspired me to do another project for this class using the same dataset but this time focusing on the changes in complaints since last year.

The shutdown of all non-essential businesses in the state went into effect March 22nd at 8 PM after Governor Andrew Cuomo signed the “New York on PAUSE” executive order. This began the official quarantine of a lot of New Yorkers. The overwhelming number of calls began when everyone started spending more time at home. The complaints chosen in these visualizations were the ones that had the biggest change over time; these are both the top 15 percent increases and decreases since the previous year. The data for 311 complaints can be found on [NYC Open Data]("https://opendata.cityofnewyork.us/"). The dates used when extracting the data were from March 22, the first day of "New York on PAUSE," to October 18, the day before the data was extracted, of both 2019 and 2020. After downloading the data, I created another dataset that gave me the count of complaints in 2019 and 2020 and the calculated percent change over those years. I then imported the data into Tableau where I started creating several random visualizations just to get an idea of what I felt like would work and what would not. Initially I was doing the project with every complaint, but it became overwhelming to look at, so I decided to focus of just the top 15 complaints with the highest percent increase and the top 15 complaints with the highest percent decrease. I found that the complaint with the highest percent increase was “Illegal Fireworks” followed by “Home Delivered Meals – Missed” and “Non-emergency Police Matters.” When I made my map visualizations the first time, I used the latitude and longitude to display each complaint. The intention was to make a cluster map to show the hotspots of where complaints were made the most. Although this sounds like it should have worked, visually it did not give a lot of information. Instead of using the position of each complaint I decided to create a heatmap that shows the number of complaints in each zip code. Immediately this created a much more effective visual. I then decided to do a side-by-side map to show the difference in number of complaints between 2019 and 2020. After getting feedback from my peers, I was made aware that another graph that changed with the map would be useful which created the addition of the bar graph that changed to display the counts of a complaint in the selected zip code. I also added a set of bar graphs that showed the top percent increases and decreases in complaints which I made available as dropdown options to be able to change the map according to the complaint type.

In making this project, I came across a couple challenges. My first challenge was planning out what I wanted my audience to take away from my project and how I would display that. The peer reviews really helped me in that because it almost felt like having a test group viewing my project and being able to see if they can pick up on what I am trying to convey. Another challenge I came across was learning how to embed Tableau visuals into an HTML file and make sure it fits the page and can be centered. If I had more time and resources, I probably would have tried to create the visuals in either another software or using d3. One of the problems my project has that was unable to be remedied was the color scale of the heatmap. Tableau does not offer too much freedom to customize the color scale and the range of colors was not broad enough to accurately depict the differences between the two maps however because of the drastic change over time it still was noticed. This unfortunately is a huge downfall of Tableau in trying to make map visualizations. In the end, making this project really taught me to follow through on ideas and how to ask for and incorporate feedback. Towards the end of the semester, I feel as though I became more confident in my work, with presenting my project in the peer and guest critique, and in being able to pre-record my presentation for the showcase. This class really helped me gain a lot of skills I know I would need in the future to be able to work in a professional setting.
